One killer YouTube video could
completely change your life, but most
videos flop before you even write a
single word. I had a client who spent 3
weeks perfecting what he thought was the
perfect script only to realize his idea
was dead on arrival. My name is Brian
and I've written a thousand plus YouTube
scripts in the past year. In this video,
I'm breaking down the nine things you
should never do before scripting a
YouTube video. Mistake one, most
YouTubers write an amazing script first,
then try to figure out the title and
thumbnail later. That's mistake number
one right there. When you finalize your
script before locking your title and
thumbnail, you're setting yourself up
for disaster. You'll write what you
think is a brilliant script and then
realize the title doesn't actually match
what you deliver. The thumbnail then
becomes this random afterthought instead
of driving the content of your video.
What ends up happening is you reverse
engineer a weaker title to fit your
script instead of writing a script that
delivers on a strong promise. That's
completely backwards. The fix is simple,
but I know that most of you will never
follow this advice, but I will emphasize
it time and time and time and time again
is that you need to lock in your title
and thumbnail concept before you write
your script so that you can fulfill on
the promise set by your title and
thumbnail. And that's because your title
is a contract with your viewer and your
script needs to fulfill that contract
perfectly. This brings us to mistake
number two and this one kills more
channels than anything else I've seen.
Most YouTubers prioritize picking topics
when in reality they should be focusing
on video angles. How to grow on YouTube
is a topic. It's generic. It's boring.
And you're competing with thousands of
other videos saying the exact same
thing. But when you say, "This is a
3minut trick that got me a 100,000
subscribers," that is an angle that
stands out because it's specific. It
creates urgency and has a curiosity
element which makes people wonder, "What
is this three-step trick?" Solely
focusing on topics is a big mistake
because they're unspecific and they're
generic. Whereas, if you focus on a
strong angle that creates urgency and
specificity, you can actually drive the
click. When you stick with topics, you
want to own a unique perspective. If you
want to own a certain category rather
than blending in with everyone else
talking about the same topics, instead
of how to lose weight, try why eating
more helped me lose 30 lbs. Instead of
social media marketing tips, go with the
Instagram feature everyone ignores that
doubled my sales. You want to create
intrigue by saying something completely
different. And that's how you stand out
from the crowd and you completely
dominate a category within a topic. And
that brings us to mistake number three,
which is something I see even the most
experienced YouTubers completely mess
up. Everyone looks at what's performing
for the top channels in their niche to
figure out what kind of videos to make.
That seems completely logical, right?
Just follow outlier theory. That is what
everyone is saying. But there is a much
more efficient system. Instead of
analyzing your competitors all the time,
which is exactly what your competitors
are doing, you want to analyze the data
that is right in front of you, which is
your channel. Your audience has probably
already told you what they want to watch
from your channel and you just need to
double triple down on that because your
best performing videos contain the
blueprint for what's going to work in
the future. But once again, most people
completely ignore what's in front of
them and you end up wasting time trying
to validate brand new ideas. When your
analytics is the one thing that you have
access to that your competitors don't
have access to, you can literally dive
deep into it. Look at your suggested
videos. look at who's clicking on your
videos, what else they are watching, and
kind of come up with a hypothesis on
what videos to create based on that. For
example, on my particular channel, you
will see all of my top performing videos
are long courses on YouTube script
writing. So, I have two options. I can
create more long courses or I can create
more videos on YouTube script writing,
which is exactly what I'm doubling down
on because that is exactly what my
audience wants from me. You want to give
your audience exactly what they want,
right? And that is in terms of video
ideas, video titles, in terms of the
script structures. So study your top
three performing videos. Ask yourself
why did these videos perform well? And
then take those core principles and turn
that into new video ideas that you can
immediately start printing money with
and that you can immediately start
printing views with. As a good rule of
thumb, always double down. But before we
dive into research mistake that
YouTubers make that are absolutely
killing their channel, I've made a
YouTube script writing checklist so that
you don't have to make any of the
mistakes that we covered in this video.
It's literally a step-by-step checklist.
You just go through this entire
checklist before you write your script
so you don't have to make the same
mistakes that I made when I first
started out. Click the link in the
description and I'll send it right to
your inbox. But having the right topic
and angle means nothing if you don't
validate it first. Which brings us to
mistake number four. I can guarantee you
everyone has been there, including me.
You spend hours, weeks, sometimes even
months refining a single script, but you
realize that the idea isn't actually
compelling at all. So, you try to force
fit a title, try to forcefeit an idea
into the specific script, and it does
not work because the idea was never
interesting to begin with. No amount of
great writing can save a weak video idea
that doesn't trigger your audience to
actually click on the video because the
idea is king. It's super duper easy to
have a video idea, immediately get
excited about it, go straight into
scripting without actually validating
that people actually want it. And you
completely waste all of your time
writing the script when eventually you
have to throw it out or you'll force
yourself to post it knowing that it's
not going to perform. And guess what? It
never does perform. Missing this
validation step is like building a
beautiful house on quicksand. It's just
going to sink no matter what. I had a
client who spent two weeks writing this
incredibly detailed script about YouTube
analytics. The writing was fantastic,
the structure was perfect, and it had
all of the great elements of great
information for a video, but the title
was around nerdy YouTube analytics,
which 99% of people won't even get to
the stage of, and people won't really
want to click on it. I mean, like, who's
going to click on a YouTube analytics
video? It sounds like homework. I have
to dive deep into all of the content.
It's not worth it. And once again, the
fix is to validate a specific video idea
by once again looking at your specific
channel for any ideas that you might
get. And number two, if you don't have
any data on your channel to suggest a
specific video idea might work, if you
have competitor analysis, that might
tell you, hey, this topic might actually
have a good chance of popping off. And
if no one wants to see your topic,
you're better off making videos about
another one. Mistake five. This one
breaks my heart because it's so
preventable. Yet, most YouTubers commit
this sin all of the time. Most YouTubers
write their entire script first, then
try to craft a hook at the end. That's
completely backwards. Your hook becomes
weak because you're forcing it to fit
content that wasn't built around it.
Think about it like this. The first 10
seconds of your script determines 80% of
your script's performance. Just like in
copyrightiting, the headline is 80% of
what makes a specific sales page
convert. Writing YouTube scripts is no
different because it's all words.
Meaning, the first 10 seconds is where
you want to spend majority of your time
because it determines whether you hold
the attention of the viewer or not.
Writing your script before planning out
your hook is like choosing what music to
play at a party after everyone's already
gone home. It's completely backwards.
Doesn't make sense at all. The music is
the hook. The music is what gets
everyone to come to your party in the
very first place. Your content should
fit into your hook. Your hook shouldn't
be trying to fit into your content. Just
like how the title and thumbnail sets
expectations for the hook, the hook sets
expectations for the rest of the video.
And that's why it's meant to be written
in that exact sequence. Title and
thumbnail first and then your hook and
then the rest of your script. So the
fix, write your hook first, then build
the rest of your script around it. If
your hook promises the mistakes that's
killing your YouTube growth, your entire
script should be about that one specific
mistake, not talking about five other
mistakes that completely dilutes your
main message. Mistake six. This is where
I see YouTubers sabotage their own
attention without even realizing it.
Most people research facts and
statistics, but they completely miss the
emotional frustrations that actually
hook viewers. You spend hours gathering
data about algorithm changes or best
posting times or blah blah blah, but you
won't spend 5 minutes understanding why
your audience wants to watch. Because
facts do inform your audience, but it
doesn't get your viewers to take action.
Because your viewers will likely forget
90% of what you told them and only
retain 10% of the information, but what
they will remember is how you made them
feel when you talked about a certain
topic. Because when you lead with
statistics instead of an emotional
trigger in your educational content,
that leads to them going into their
logical brain. Whereas, when you're
educating your viewer, it's much more
important to get them into an excited or
fearful emotional state. And that way,
they will actually retain the
information better. This isn't
manipulation. This is actually helping
your audience. You want them to remember
how you feel so that that way they can
come back to your content over and over
and over again. And that's what makes a
cult-like audience. For every fact that
you research, you need to find the
emotional frustration that solves it or
the desire that fulfills. Don't just
tell people how the algorithm works.
Tell them why their current approach is
keeping them stuck and how understanding
the algorithm will finally free them
from the shackles and the jail of this
algorithm view jail blah blah blah. When
you're able to understand what keeps
your audience up at night, you can write
content that's compelling that directly
targets their pain points, makes them,
you know, sit up when you start talking
and watch your video from start to
finish. Helps your retention. Now, we're
getting into the structural mistakes
that kill retention. And mistake number
seven is probably the most common one I
see from creators who have good ideas
but terrible execution. Most people plan
their content like a college lecture
instead of understanding how YouTube
actually works. When you structure your
content linearly, meaning you go from
point A to point B to point C without
any pattern interrupts, it's boring and
it feels like a college lecture and it's
just like you're rambling without a
clear point. You want to constantly
rehook your viewer. Your viewers are
being bombarded by hundreds of
notifications every single hour and it's
your job to hold their attention and not
make them bored. But when your content
is planned in a linear fashion, ABC,
you're basically telling your viewer to
sit through a boring lecture. It's
basically an information dump that they
can get by talking to Chad GBT, which is
no wonder why people click off in 2
minutes. And that's why before you even
write the script, you want to plan in
your open loops, your curiosity gaps,
how you're going to hook your viewers in
again. And that way, when you're
delivering information in an
entertainment video or an educational
video, maybe you don't go in
chronological order, ABC, maybe you
bring the end all the way to the front
to rehook the viewer, or maybe you you
switch points B and A as kind of a plot
twist there. So, when you think about it
from an engagement point of view to
really tease the end, to get the viewer
to want to keep watching, it's actually
like super duper interesting that way.
When you don't go in chronological order
and you think about what is the best way
to hook the viewers, retain their
attention, and get them to consume the
entertainment or the education that
you're giving them. In terms of a
pattern interrupt, I always ask myself,
how can I insert one every 45 seconds?
So, this could be in terms of a visual
change, in terms of an energy change.
Maybe you're a lot more enthusiastic on
camera, something happens, or a
curiosity gap to get them, hey, what
happens all the way at the end of this
story? You want to constantly give your
viewers a reason to keep watching. For
educational videos, it's giving them a
new aha moment or something to think
about or a new change of pace in the
story. Whereas, for entertainment
videos, there can be a camera switch, an
unexpected twist, or a new character
introduction. All of it works, but there
needs to be a pattern interrupt. And
this brings us to mistake number eight,
which is going to change your approach
to script writing forever. Most people
will just mumble to themselves before
they write their script on paper. And
then they'll go on their laptop, they'll
click, click, click, click, click, and
then the script is done. And then
they'll go and record it without
speaking it out loud. But you miss this
massive opportunity to make your content
sound exactly like yourself. Because
just like you are presenting on camera,
there's a certain level of energy.
There's a certain level of excitement
about the topic that you're talking
about. So before you write your script,
I highly encourage you to whip out your
phone. just start talking directly into
your phone, right? Just brain dumping
your ideas and then you can use AI or
whatever to structure these ideas in
your voice because it's exactly verbatim
how you said it and then you can see it
all on paper in a way that's said in
your voice and then you can structure
that way to turn it into a full YouTube
script. You definitely don't just want
to sit there quietly and hope that ideas
come to you because when you speak it
out loud, you know, your brains start to
connect, your neurons start firing off
and you get even more new ideas once you
say it out loud, right? Just like how
when you do a single presentation, you
present it once, you get new ideas from
it from presenting. You present it
twice, you get new ideas from presenting
it. So, you don't have to wait for your
first full script to be out in order to
actually read it out loud. You can just
riff on it. You probably have some kind
of a mental scheme of how the video will
go and then you just can just read it
out loud to your phone. Super duper
easy. Will completely change your script
writing game. Plus, in your final
product of your script, you will have
your energy, you have your personality,
and you will have your speaking style
done before you even have to do your
first edit. Pretty powerful. Mistake
nine. This is where most creators
completely miss the point of what
YouTube actually is. When writing a
script, it's easy to get caught up in
the words and just assume that's the
entire video. But YouTube is not just
audio-based, it's also visual. So, you
don't just want to script out your
words, you also want to script out your
visuals. B-roll is just as essential as
the main script. Because strong B-roll
can improve the effectiveness of your
script by over 10 times. But visual
storytelling isn't just about having
rockets fly over the screen whenever you
say something different. It's about
using every element within your script
and enhancing it with a certain visual
to back up exactly what you're saying so
that the audience can understand you
better. If you're writing your script on
a Google doc like I usually do, you can
write your visual directions by doing a
comment on the specific script so that
the editor knows what kind of visual to
put on screen when you are illustrating
a certain point. Or you can also write
it in brackets in terms of the visual
that you want, whatever works for you.
So, for example, when you mention a
statistic, you can tell it, oh, put this
graph up on the screen. Or if you're
citing a specific research study, you
can link the research study there. And
then they can pull it up on the screen
and highlight the specifics part that
you're talking about. It illustrates the
point a lot clearer and it brings you a
lot more authority rather than just
saying, "Oh, this research study says X,
Y, and Z." Your script should be
complete blueprint not just for you as
the presenter or the voiceover artist
but also for the editor so that they
know the exact direction to take the
video because this makes your editing
faster, your retention much higher and
your message actually have a higher
impact with your viewers. But here's the
thing that most YouTubers don't realize.
Avoiding these presscripting mistakes is
just the foundation. You now have to
actually learn how to write your full
script. And there's actually a new way
to do it in 2026. Click on this video
over here to learn the new way to script
a viral YouTube video in 2026. You won't
regret it. Thanks for watching and I'll
see you in the next one.